---
title: tic-tac-toe
date: 2025-08-09
Tags: [minimax, optimal, games]
---

Can you [beat this robot at tic tac toe](https://jamesgadoury.github.io/tic-tac-toe/)?

Unless I made a mistake in my code, you shouldn't be able to.
Tic-tac-toe is a solved game with a [well defined optimal strategy](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Tic-tac-toe#Strategy).
This strategy can be programmed directly with some if/else branching. 

Alternatively, it can be found through dynamic programming. The tic-tac-toe "agent" programmed
in the above link uses a value table to determine the next best move. This value table
shows the (wait for it) value of each possible state of the tic-tac-toe board, serialized into a
consistent format to serve as keys into the table. The state of any given board is serialized
as 9 numbers, with 0s representing available places on the board, 1s representing
places occupied by the agent, and 2s representing places occupied by its opponent. When it
is the agent's turn to play, it looks at every possible next state (which would result by
the plays available to it) and picks the one with the highest value in its table.

We can run [the minimax algorithm](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Minimax) twice,
once from the perspective of the first player, and then a second time
from the perspective of the second player to generate a value table for each perspective.
Key-value pairs from these two tables can be extracted and used to populate a single value table.
The same value table can be used for either perspective, because the first player will never encounter a
state to act on that the second player could, and vice versa. Using this table, we have an
agent that will never lose at tic-tac-toe. Code [here](https://github.com/jamesGadoury/tic-tac-toe).

